>> David Khourshid: So in this exercise
we're going to be keeping those principles
in mind through pretty much
the entire workshop and
of course also this exercise, but
also we're going to be doing two things.
We're going to be combining states,
so really reducing the number
of use states that we have.
And we're also going to be learning
about type states and finite states.
So, let's talk about the first concept.
Let's go to a scratch pad,
so finite scratch.
Okay, let's say that we have
an application for, I don't know,
let's say that we're making coffee.
So we have const coffeeType,
setCoffeeType.
We have different types and
it's already like just giving me
a whole bunch of different options.
We also have size, and
we also might have sugar and milk.
The thing is that all of
these are actually related.
So we're ordering a coffee.
We do have multiple use dates here.
One of the things that I want you to get
used to, you don't necessarily need to do
this, but honestly, when you have a lot of
use dates, it can become a problem, but
group related data together.
So, instead of all of this, we could just
have, let's call this coffee, say coffee.
And instead we could combine all
of this into a single object.
So this is going to be the type of coffee,
the size, the sugar and milk.
And we can all have this
in one single object.
Now the pattern for
updating the state is actually
going to be a little bit different.
So over here, when we're handling
the coffee type change, we're no longer
just setting the single state variable,
instead we're updating the entire object.
So that can look like one of two things.
It can either look like something
where you take that existing
object like coffee, and
then you pass in the type over here.
So you're basically taking that
entire object and just saying,
I want this object with this type updated.
Now there actually might be
a small problem with this.
This coffee is a closed in variable, so we
have a closure issue, which sometimes it's
not a problem, but other times we
might see some unwanted side effects.
Which is why I actually recommend
using the pattern of grabbing
the previous value and instead using that.
So that's going to use
the existing coffee over here and
say I want to update the type
based on the previous value of it.
So that is one way that we could
basically combine our entire state.
So, let's put some default values here,
and that's exactly what it looks like.
Now, another thing that I really
want to demonstrate here and
what we're gonna be using in this
exercise, is the idea of finite states.
So let's say that we have another two and
then we are making our coffeeOrder.
So let's say that we have const
coffeeOrder set coffeeOrder.
And this is just, yeah, oops,
some use state over here
we're ordering a cappuccino,
and we also want to model
actually making this order.
So this is probably muscle memory
to a lot of React developers.
But you're going to start
with your constIsLoading,
setIsLoading, and
then maybe const isSuccess.
So you have that boolean and then const,
oops, const error, setError.
And then you're going to
actually kick off the,
the ordering process,
probably in a use effect.
So you're gonna have
a useEffect over here, and
then again this is all muscle memory.
You want your coffeeOrder over here,
and then it's going to,
it's going to do something,
it's going to make a fetch request.
So, let's actually do a demo
fetch request over here.
So, mock fetch call.
So we might do something where
like we're fetching that order and
then we have all this
boilerplate that we have to add.
We set success to true, loading to false.
And then if we have an error,
then we also set loading to false.
And this just gets problematic because
it might seem simple over here,
but we're really managing two
seemingly unrelated pieces of state
that are actually supposed to be related.
And we also need to handle canceling.
So if not cancelled,
then we go ahead with this.
So instead of that, I want you to,
just based on our previous exercise,
think about the different
states that we could be in.
And so this actually makes
a pretty simple refactor.
Instead of is loading is success and
error, we could do const status,
and we could have a string
enum representing the status.
Now we could eliminate
basically both of these,
and instead we could set status loading.
We could eliminate both of these and
just set status to success because
those are mutually exclusive.
We never want it to be loading
in success at the same time,
in reality we're just changing one thing.
And then we have an error over here, so
we're gonna set the status to error.
And so, that's one way that we
could really simplify handling
multiple boolean states that are really
meant to represent one kind of state.
Now if you want to go above and
beyond, there's something called, or
there's a pattern called type states.
And so with type states, here's
a problem that it solves first of all.
Let's say that we're trying
to render something and
we have if status is success.
So, let me add another variable here
we have const receipt, set receipt.
And this could either be a string or null.
So, I want to show the receipt,
but again the receipts.
Actually let's do this.
Let's make the receipt a total.
So, a problem with this is that, and
it doesn't matter if you're using finite
states or if you're just doing
something in your application where you
are 100,000% sure that this receipt,
when the status is success.
Or even if you have issuccess, you know
that that receipt is going to exist
because, let's say that we
set the receipt over here.
So we're setting the status and
we're setting the receipt.
You know that that exists.
So in Typescript you might
add an exclamation mark.
It's actually totally fine if you add
multiple exclamation marks in some cases.
I discovered that randomly.
But the idea is that you want to,
at a type level,
ensure that this receipt exists.
So, how exactly can we do that?
Well, we can use type states.
So type, let's see, CoffeeOrder.
And we're going to be using in Typescript
what's called a discriminated union.
So, instead of just a plain status string,
we're gonna put it inside of this object.
So we're gonna say status is idle or
loading or success or error.
And this is actually
a good way to start out.
You have the error, and then you have
the receipts inside the same object.
So from there you could actually
transform this to a discriminated
union by adding this pipe and
then saying status success.
So now we could actually get rid of this,
and
we could say that the receipt
is definitely defined over here.
So we could say that in this
case the the receipt is null.
But when we have success,
we definitely have the receipt.
And so here's how this looks.
Let's actually just put
this somewhere else.
So let's const CoffeeOrder.
And then we have idle.
We have no error and no receipts.
And I'm actually going to
delete this over here.
And so instead of this,
we could set coffeeOrder to
status success with the receipt.
And here is the really,
really cool part about this.
This enforces the data in two places,
both when you're setting it.
So if I get rid of receipts,
it's actually going to yell at me and say,
you're missing the receipt here,
you're saying it's success, but
the receipt doesn't exist.
So it's really forcing us to
keep that state consistent.
And then over here,
I no longer need this or
I have to do coffeeOrder.receipt.total.
So if I say coffeeOrder.status is success,
then I know for a fact that that exists.
So if I change this to error,
I know that we don't have a receipt here,
or at least we can't read the total
because it might possibly be null.
And so that's what type states are very,
very useful for.
>> Speaker 2: In the first example, when
setting the coffee state, you mentioned
using previous because splatting coffee
had some pitfalls, which by the way,
I think this is the answer to the previous
chat's question about setting a profile.
Send the name and profile, this is what
they were wondering how to do this.
But what are the pitfalls of
just spreading coffee versus
using the previous statement?
>> David Khourshid: You might run into
closure problems with that because you
might have a stale version of coffee.
No one likes stale coffee, especially
if you microwave, it tastes terrible.
But if you have a stale version of
a value, then when you set coffee,
you might accidentally revert
to that previous version or
at least different properties
of that previous version.
And this can show up in many cases,
if you put this in a used memo and
decide to memoize it excessively.
Or maybe it's in an event handler
that does not change for some reason.
Or even in a useEffect, there's just
many places where that might come up.
And so that's why, honestly, as a best
practice in a habit, just try to go based
on the previous value inside of that
function, because over here you're
guaranteed that that value is going to
be the latest value value of that state.
>> Speaker 3: I'm thinking of a scenario
where some related states will be updated
in one context provider, but
a smaller consumer component may
only use one part of the data.
So will that lead to
unnecessary read renders?
>> David Khourshid: That's
a very good question.
So, it definitely depends.
And this would be a good use case for
useMemo.
So you could just see if all
of those values are the same.
But honestly,
it's not a big problem in practice.
I wouldn't recommend you to just put every
single use date inside your component
inside of a single use date.
Instead, I want you to
separate it by concern.
So for example, this coffee object, this
is an object that we could pass around.
And so chances are that if we change
the size or any part about that coffee,
the entire object
fundamentally changes and so
we might want to let components
downstream know about that change.
But in practice I haven't
seen this to be a problem.
So, always just double check before you
decide to put any optimizations in place.
But just know that there do exist some
optimizations in react like useMemo,
etc., for that.
And then Masij asks in CoffeeOrder,
did we use generic type
as the first variance because
the union was not exhaustive?
So in reality, yeah, you might wanna
flesh this out a little bit more.
So for example, if we're loading,
then we know that we don't have a receipt,
we don't have an error, but
if there is an error, so we definitely
have an error and there's no receipt.
So then we could just get rid of these and
we have our complete type state over here.
So this is more around the lines
of what it should look like.